Project Summary
William Riley Casper
Overview. The National Science Foundation Division of Mathematical Sciences annually accepts
proposals for research projects in algebra and number theory, with funding for research related
equipment, travel expenses, conference support and summer salary for up to three years (for
2020, see NSF PD 20-1264). The following research summary is intended for pursuing funding
for research through this program during the 2021 funding cycle. The project below fits well in
line with the NSF’s goal of generating new knowledge in science and mathematics, and with the
specific program’s target of supporting research in algebra, algebraic and arithmetic geometry,
number theory, and representation theory.
Background. In the algebraic theory of the Kadomtsev-Petviashvili (KP) equation, algebraic
geometry is used to produce expressions for exact solutions u(x, y, t) of the KP equation
uxt + uux + uxxx ± uyy = 0,

(1)

and more generally solutions of a system of nonlinear partial differential equations called the KP
hierarchy. The KP equation arises naturally in geophysical fluid dynamics and, incredibly, in
algebraic geometry via Shiota’s solution of the Schottky problem [?].
Solutions of the KP hierarchy are determined by the orbits of points in an infinite dimensional
space, Sato’s grassmannian Gr, under the action of a loop group. Special “geometric” points of
Sato’s grassmannian have finite dimensional orbits, and the assocated action may be redescribed
in terms of the action of an abelian variety. Specifically, Krichever correspondence associates
a geometric point of Gr to a vector bundle on an algebraic curve, creating explicit solutions
of the KP equation in terms of theta functions. Motivated by these connections, the proposed
research project will discover new applications of integrable systems to noncommutative algebra
and algebraic geometry and vice versa, expanding on recent results of the PI which fit the same
theme [?, ?, ?, ?]. With Sato’s grassmannian as our centerpiece, we will interpret classes of
geometric and nongeometric points in a variety of ways: as integral operators, as commutative
families of fractional differential operators, and as Darboux transformations. In the first project,
the KP dynamics will inform our study of the spectral theory of integral operators, allowing us to
discover a new, universal description of the spectral data of prolate-spheroidal integral operators.
The second project will follow up by describing new solutions of the KP hierarchy involving nongeometric points interpreted as commuting algebras of fractional differential operators. Finally,
the third project will explore a vector-valued adelic-type grassmannian as a classifying space of
noncommutative bispectral Darboux transformations of orthogonal matrix polynomials.

